the Palestinian militant group Hamas
says it has chosen its top military
commander in Gaza as its new political
leader Yahya sinir replaces Ismael hania
who was assassinated in Iran last week
in an attack blamed on Israel Israel
believes senoir masterminded the October
7th Terror attacks and has been pursuing
him ever
since we can speak to our correspondent
Rebecca Ritter joining me now from
Jerusalem Rebecca good morning will this
appointment of senoir ch
anything in hamas's
strategy I think that's very unlikely
CLA we're not likely to see any major
changes if anything this could see the
Hamas approach become more Hardline
Yahya Sina uh the leader of Hamas in
Gaza has certainly been the more
Hardline leader from the hermas
leadership and with the assassination of
isma Han who was seen as a if not more
moderate and certainly more pragmatic
leader and this appointment of sinoa is
the central now really the most powerful
uh man in the Hamas leadership I think
that we're likely to see a more Hardline
approach if anything but though uh you
know the reason I say we may not see
much difference at all is yak sin was
already largely seen as the I me to use
to coin a term the supreme leader of
Hamas anyway he was certainly since
October 7 uh you know the go-to person
for the final word on all things from
strategy to the SE negotiation ations
certainly seen as the head of the snake
certainly within Hamas and externally so
it's unlikely that we'll see any kind of
major changes there we are now seeing a
centralization of that power and a
formalization of that centralization of
power if you will but unlikely that
we'll see anything uh in terms of a
different political or military strategy
yeah tell us more about what this means
for a possible ceasefire in Gaza will
this have implications or for the
release of Israeli hostages uh held
captive by
Hamas well as I was just trying to say I
think this it certainly will have
implications when it comes to the
ceasefire deal but I think it's not
surprising that ever since we saw the
assassination of isma hania basically
pundits within Israel have been saying
that the ceasefire Arrangement is
effectively dead in the water that you
know now with sinoa definitely elected
as the Central and most powerful figure
in Hamas I think it's unlikely that we
will see any kind of Hostage negotiation
or ceasefire deal in the the near future
the US of course saying that a political
Sol solution is still possible and it is
still the best way to calm tensions in
the region but I I think it's very
unlikely that we're going to see any
kind of agreement between Hamas and
Israel though we know that um Israel
says that for its part it's still open
to negotiations I think once with now
the centralization of power and
certainly uh with sinan now being
officially the head of the snake I think
it's unlikely that we're going to see
any negotiations reach a successful uh
end any time soon and has there been any
other reaction from Israel to this new
leadership is it is it more or less what
you would
expect well disappointment is certainly
being viewed as a as a signal or as a
you know a kind of message of strength
and of defiance towards Israel Yahya
Sina has already been on top of Israel's
list if you will for some time certainly
since October 7th they have said they
are going after the is the Hamas
leadership and that they will not stop
until they are taken down we heard from
the uh Israeli military spokesman Daniel
hagari in the aftermath of this news
saying the only place for yayya sinoa is
next to Da referring to Muhammad da the
the military leader of Hamas who was
killed in an Israeli air strike in July
and the rest of the October 7 terrorists
are certainly feeling their sentiment
there and we also heard from Israeli
cats the Israeli foreign minister saying
another reason to eliminate him uh and
the vile organization from this Earth so
you know Israel certainly not changing
its tune in fact you know becoming
stronger behind its will to eliminate
the the the leaders of Hamas Rebecca
thank you what does Rebecca riters for
us in
Jerusalem now 10 months have passed
since the Hamas Terror attacks on Israel
last October which precipitated the
ongoing war in Gaza the October the 7th
attacks began when militants infiltrated
Southern Israel from the Gaza Strip
killed some 1200 people and took around
250 hostages back to Gaza Israel's
subsequent military campaign and its
stated goal of destroying Hamas has
killed
39,0
677 Palestinians to this day now that's
according to the Palestinian Health
Ministry in Gaza that's run by Hamas
thousands more are reported missing
between the rubble and are presumed
dead now as the conflict enters its 11th
month fears of an allout Regional War
are growing at the request of Iran the
organization of Islamic cooperation is
holding an emergency meeting in jeda
Saudi Arabia the meeting will focus on
the situation following the
assassination of Hamas leader Ismael
hania in tan last week meanwhile the US
is trying to prevent the conflict from
spiraling into a major war Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin called on both
sides Iran and Israel to deescalate
let's take a listen we continue to work
intensely to deescalate tensions in the
Middle East and to prevent the spread of
conflict uh over the past few days we've
been in constant contact with Partners
in the region and well
Beyond in those
conversations we've heard a clear
consensus no one should escalate this
conflict uh we we've been engaged in
intense diplomacy with allies and
partners uh communicating that message
directly to Iran we've communicated that
message directly to Israel and we can
get more from DW Middle East analyst
Shaunie rosanas who's here in the studio
with me good to see you shaie as always
now we're hearing Anthony blinkin saying
that the US is communicating directly
with Israel directly with Iran over the
tensions in the region that we're seeing
right now what do we know what more do
we know about these Direct us Iran
contacts I'm not sure how I mean it
could be that I I would probably that
they're somewhat indirect I mean um the
Americans have been in touch despite
everything with Iran uh before October
7th ever and ever since October 7th but
never through direct channels there have
been reports about talks going through
Oman for example in May uh which they
officially denied but there is no doubt
that there is a channel of communication
there um the Iranians um seem to be
still on the fence whether you know on
how they are gun respond and the
Americans are trying to use this time
that they have to try you know and and
put some pressure and maybe get the
Iranians to understand they will back
Israel very strongly and firmly in case
of uh you know suspected escalation and
maybe trying to incentivize Iran in a
way and sort of like not just not just
sticks but also offering carrots in
order to bring all of this um you know
assumed or or expected escalation down
or prevent it rather so this is what
we're seeing on the other on one hand
and you know at the same time um the
Americans are sending send in their
carriers um into the um Mediterranean to
support Israel we know that the
commander of centcom the central
Commander for the Americans has been in
Israel Killa General Killa so they're
doing both of this sort of trying to
show strong uh you know alliance with in
in Israel with its defense but at the
same time um in secret channels to sort
of maybe just um avoid the whole you
know scenario of of escalation that is
expected to come um you know maybe that
would be the best way you know
prevention rather than just deterrence
so we're seeing this meeting today
aren't we the organization of Islamic
cooperation meeting it's happening in
jedha today will Iran is Iran likely to
find support there probably I mean what
we've been seeing in the last week since
the assassination of hania in tan is
that even uh the countries that are
considered to be the moderate Sunni
countries like like for example Saudi
Arabia who was on the verge of of
signing you know a normalization deal
with Israel the same thing with your
Jordan that has a peace agreement with
Israel and is a you know a very uh you
know strategic uh neighbor you know in
for Israel they've been distancing
themselves for Israel saying you know to
both sides you know and we know they
have had some role in helping um the
interception of the previous attack from
Iran on Israel in April they've been
saying we don't want none of it you
don't use our airspace we don't want to
be included you know and more than that
you know and this is basically a slap in
the face for Israel sort of turning the
back to Israel saying we don't want to
be part of this partially because
they're seeing how the war is ongoing
and partially also because this is all
connected to the assassination of a very
prominent Palestinian leader is hania
you know Hamas is known as a recognized
an or as a terrorist organization in
many places but for Palestinians many of
them live in Jordan many of them in the
region he was a symbol he was a hero um
and you know seeing their government
support any act standing with Israel you
know for not getting being punished for
that that's a bit of a you know more
stand for them to take 10 months after
the October the 7th attacks would you
say Israel and Hass are closer to what
they originally wanted it's unbelievable
it's been 10 months I don't think you
know Israelis have expected after 10
months to be where they are still so
deep into Gaza far from uh any
conclusion you know in the near sight I
think you know to to use uh Churchill's
famous speech we are we are probably if
you look listen very carefully to netan
this is maybe uh the the end of the
beginning but not the beginning of the
end netan seems to be very adamant in
going forward pushing very much strongly
and in a way Hamas is seeing in the last
week some of his you know you know
Wildest Dreams being coming true you
know since the beginning of you know
since October Hamas was wishing for more
and more fronts to be opened against
Israel with Lebanon with hasbalah with
Iran in the West Bank you know at
wishing for escalation and it could be
that we're on the verge of that which
would be for Hamas the best case
scenario so I mean 10 months in I'm
afraid we're just not anywhere close to
seeing an end to this inside
unfortunately DW's middle analyst shie
rosanis shie thank you you're welcome
Anya